[Music]
all right good
hello everybody welcome back to
psychedelics today today on the show we
have Chris Bosh retired professor and
professor emeritus at Youngstown State
University and author of the recent book
LSD and the mind of the universe we're
also going to be doing a giveaway so
stay tuned on that Chris thanks for
joining us
glad to be here guys so I I had been
talking about you I think even a couple
years ago and I found out about your
your kind of long-term project before
probably the book was even with a
publisher and it was really excited by
the idea and then I just totally forgot
and then all of a sudden we got
connected I think through the publisher
and no I'm very excited to record with
you because this is quite the project
you've undertaken and you've got some
very unique insights to share how do you
how do you like to start this story like
how did maybe maybe we can start with
psychedelics how did the secretary come
on your radar initially well I just
finished graduate school I was
publishing a few articles out of my
dissertation I was looking forward to
take my research I was a
brand-spanking-new University professor
and I met the work of Stan Grof and
that's what really snapped my head to
attention I did not have a psychedelic
history I was I finished graduate school
in religious studies as they pretty
deeply convinced atheistic Lee inclined
agnostic but I read Stan's work and like
bomb went off inside of me and I said
this is important not just to psychology
but it's important to philosophy
religion which was in my training and I
wanted to get involved I wanted to do it
but of course it hadn't been made
illegal so I split my life I in my
ordinary day job I continued to function
as professor of Religious Studies in the
park
thought conventional kind of courses or
semi conventional courses and I began a
20-year what became eventually a
twenty-year Germany working with LSD
following Stan Grof paradigm and then
pushing the limits of that paradigm
pretty far much farther than I
appreciated at the time hmm and I was
trained in philosophy of religion so I
kept careful records careful notes tried
to make the engagement as clean and this
productive as possible and I knew there
would come a time sooner or later when I
would share the experiences or shared
the insights from the experiences with a
broader audience and after I retired
from the University that time finally
came mm-hmm perfect and what was the
first protein do you have any kind of
previous spontaneous mystical
experiences or anything before that that
kind of clued you into how important
these things might be
I've always been envious of people who
have had you know I was 12 years old
when I had my first pond taneous
mystical experience that's not the way
it's been for me I've always been kind
of deeply locked into my body and my
physical experience you know I I was
reasonably well educated in Western
religious thought I became educated in
eastern religious thought in a broad
spectrum of contemporary thought but no
I had no background in many ways I'm the
last person you would have expected to
write a book on I'm deep psychedelic
states of consciousness it's just I mean
I grew up in Mississippi I got a degree
in theology from the University of Notre
Dame before going on to graduate school
so this wasn't part of my background
involved I'm curious how did you stumble
across a stands work by not having any
exposure to psychedelics beforehand well
I was reading widely in different areas
I was reading and kind of emerging
transpersonal psychology it interested
me the two people that whose work I met
my first year out one was Ian Stevenson
whose work at the University
Virginia convinced me that reincarnation
is a simple fact of life and that was a
jolt because it hadn't been part of my
education anywhere and now I met Stan's
work and he had just published three
years before realms of the human
unconscious and that was a book that
really did it for me and so Ian gave me
kind of empirical evidence that there
had to be another dimension of reality
other than the physical world because
there if there is any time interval
between the death of one personality and
the birth of the second personality
there has to be a place for them to
exist during that time and Stan gave me
the methodology that allowed me to the
prospect of exploring that reality so I
just decided to go for it so maybe next
like what what did the protocol look
like to you like it to me it looks like
a very it clearly looks like the work
being done at Hopkins and by maps now
but was it any different in your
perspective at this point no I think
it's pretty much conventional in that
respect you're always working in
complete isolation you're always working
with the sitter you're always working
with a very carefully curated playlist
of music the difference is after I did
three medium dose LSD sessions and then
shifted to working with very high levels
of LSD so I worked at 500 to 600
micrograms at first I did it simply for
our efficiency because it was hard to
get time in a dual career marriage for
you know arranging a session day and I
wanted to make the most out of every day
I also thought it would get me to my
early goal with enlightenment faster if
I could Kennedy do my Karma and bigger
bites that eventually is a project that
just dissolved along the way in the
whole concept of a personal spiritual
journey or strictly personal
evolutionary project that fell out along
the way
so the difference I think is the
quantity the poet that first the
psychedelic view is very different than
psilocybin there
MVM a working with very high doses which
changed the whole trajectory of the
experience and then I basically began to
curate a much more aggressive playlist
with the music I used a lot more
indigenous music I didn't use classical
Western music I use a much more
aggressive approach in music itself but
otherwise very much like contemporary
therapeutic approaches to psychedelics
yeah that's I guess a track a little bit
too so your book really kind of covers
these what was it 73 high-dose sessions
so these like your focus covering all
these insights of your experiences and
some of your philosophical work and
really understanding consciousness from
these experiences so I don't know if I
forget if we gave up the show there so
that's just to give some context of what
we're talking about and what Joe meant
about protocol of how you're setting
that up and I'm curious why did the
music change over time I happened upon
some indigenous chanting music and I
threw it into my session on the next day
and the next week and it had such a
profound impact on the intensity of the
session it basically rattled my cage
much more aggressively than some of the
more even aggressive classical music I
like the effect I recognize that it's
sort of more disorienting more giving me
stronger support for going deeper into
consciousness so I just I began to
cultivate and collect the type of music
yeah that's really interesting and from
your perspective how important is music
when you're doing high dose psychedelics
or just like you know like kind of
therapy and that self-discovery format I
think it's very very important I've done
sessions without music eventually after
long down the road and I've done
psilocybin sessions with and without
music but in working with a very strong
psychedelic like let's
working at these very high doses which
by the way I don't recommend I truly do
not recommend that people do what I did
I wouldn't do it the same way mmm
if I did it today but basically when
you're working with opening
consciousness that radically music is it
has a tremendously powerful effect I
would maybe estimate it has a
concentrating amplifying effect by five
or ten times doing it without its
psychedelic but without music so I
remember that I started using music only
in the fourth session and the jump that
happened in that fourth session was just
enormous so I think it's very important
yeah it's the topic that keeps coming up
I guess within the psychedelic community
especially when talking about putting
playlists together for therapy and I
just recently recorded an episode with a
fellow who composes music and ended up
taking his experiences and making music
out of it so yeah I think the music
piece is just really interesting it's a
huge part of you know breath work as
well Bonnie of course her early work
plugging the various stages of an LSD
journey and the characteristics of music
that support each of those stages as we
go important work yeah so where did this
idea come from of wanting to engage in
this these high dose sessions like did
you start off saying I'm going to do you
know X amount of sessions and really
dive in or did you go in saying I'm all
have a few and then see where it goes or
just you have this idea kind of mapped
out of doing X amount of sessions or
have had a goal with it at all no I did
not have any trajectory or any goal
I saw the range of experiences at
standard score I've been realms of even
unconscious I saw you know since I had a
pretty good grounding in Western
philosophical thought and theological
thought I had a good sense of the
significance of these states of
consciousness that he was describing and
I believed that
the people who would be making the most
important contributions and my
discipline would be speaking out of an
experiential basis in a matter of years
not out of a theory simply a theoretical
basis this was common in my time so I
just I knew that to do that you just had
to get in and do your work and I had no
idea how long the work could be I was
still thinking in the early years you
know you basically go through ego death
and then you get unrestricted access you
know to the deep consciousness of
existence what I found of course is that
it's not mattered simply of shattering
the ego and going through ego death the
universe has many many layers and while
it's all holographically integrated in a
sense if you engage the universe
systematically and with the carefully
defined kind of methodology the universe
takes you in by degrees it takes you in
by layers and as you move into a new
layer of consciousness and your
consciousness stabilizes at that new
layer sooner or later if you keep
pushing it the method you're using has
sufficient power to take you to the very
edge of that new layer you're going to
go through yet another death and rebirth
process it's different than ego death
but builds upon that process and you go
through a series of death and rebirth
process since you asked you explored
progressively deeper and levels of
consciousness at least that's how it
happened for me it may be different for
other people and different substances
but how it happened to me that there was
a systematic progression entry into
communion with the universe and that's
where I laid out the book I just
basically took it in start at the
beginning
try to I tried to describe to recognize
the levels of consciousness that I went
into consolidating the story to make it
as efficiently conveyed as possible and
then each chapter basically goes into
another level of consciousness or
another level of engagement with the
universe how would you I guess define
that layer of consciousness like like
what do you mean by that of getting to
these next layer
you know sometimes you hear in like the
New Age like oh you ascend to 3d to 5d
and maybe that's how you know some
people are making sense of that but how
would you describe that moving through
layers
well I adopted the working vocabulary
that Stan has developed in his books of
between psychic levels subtle level and
calls and level consciousness
differentiates low and high psychic low
and high subtle and low and high causal
and that's a vocabulary that works for
me of course the universe is so deep and
has so many hundreds of levels those are
just approximations and I don't have any
vested interest in a particular model of
the universe or model of how many levels
of consciousness there are when I was
going through and writing the book and
looking back retrospectively at where
this journey went and how many core
death and rebirth the cycles there were
their main sub cycles of death and
rebirth but four fundamental death and
rebirth cycles and therefore different
levels of consciousness when it moves
into I found I differentiated five
levels the first it takes place at the
personal mind the level of personal mind
and that culminates an ego death where
you lose your ego occur time-space
identity the second takes place or took
place for me at the collective mind its
dynamics fundamentally if they early saw
the levels of consciousness it has to do
with the species mind dimensions of
species existence the third level is
archetypal mind where when it's moving
into the highest little level moving
beyond simply the collective
consciousness of the species moving into
different levels of archetypal reality
the fourth for me is causal mind causal
oneness free moving into profound states
of non-dual reality yeah calls a reality
and then the fifth is I called I'm
particularly the clear experience of
ultra-clear particularly clear dimension
of light and there are many many
different you know degrees of light that
one encounters the closest I could find
in the conventional spiritual literature
to this was in the Buddhist concept of
dharmakaya the clear light of absolute
reality the light that pre-exists prior
to the Big Bang right Stephen kind of
talks about that with his first LSD
experience right preceding and thinking
about these levels of consciousness and
thinking about this like kind of new
psychedelic Renaissance with psychedelic
therapy how important do you think it is
for therapists to kind of understand
these these levels of consciousness when
working with clients if you're going to
be a psychedelic therapist of course
because there are many different levels
of consciousness as a therapist one
works at different levels of
consciousness so I don't think a
therapist has to have deep familiarity
with all the levels to work at the early
levels but I think the conventional
wisdom it's a good wisdom that if you're
going to be working with clients going
into deep non-ordinary states of
consciousness you must be personally
familiar with those states otherwise how
can you be the stabilizing factor in the
room when someone is losing their mind
and is terrified of losing everything
they know that to be real if you haven't
been there yourself if you haven't
learned to let go how can you help
someone else let go at those deep levels
so I think it's very important and that
poses a challenge of course in training
psychedelic therapist because we're in
this great period down but that's going
to be changing and we're going to be
moving into a different legal
environment soon I hope that you guys
are doing and other people are doing
it's really creating new possibilities
but I think you know personal experience
is really important in the theory yeah
thanks for that
it's been a hot kind of topic I guess
that's people have been exploring should
therapist really understand this this
these layers of consciousness and these
experiences to be a guide Yeah right
which is interesting this whole idea of
yes you can get this training but you
don't necessarily need a session but
then there's this whole vast realm of
religious and philosophy like this
material that discusses all of these
states in kind of literature form or we
can go experiential with it too and I my
problem lately is I really want a very
strong argument for this and I haven't
really personally been able to come up
with one a strong argument for the
importance of least personally at least
personal experience but the point I
think that you made which is unique is
there's these very complex spiritual
experiences you can have transpersonal
experiences you have and that's not
really discussed in the literature as
far as I can tell in terms of that at
least the recent literature like how do
you be about this you know yes you
became Buddha for a millennia and now
you're trying to you know work through
your day job again what what do you do
yeah any comments on that
kind of thing well I think it's
important for people to have a good
solid theoretical grounding I mean I
think it's important to read deeply in
transpersonal psychology and works like
Stan Grof and the various people who
have been guiding people or taking
people into these domains and have
compiled a large database experiential
database but if you don't have personal
experience of these realities you're
always working at a disadvantage and you
can have a verbal understanding of what
it means
to go through into certain territories
but if you haven't some personal
exposure of this territory you're going
to make mistakes you're going to draw
inferences we're an experienced
journeyer would not draw those
inferences you're going to find
correlations where there aren't
correlations
you'll miss correlations where there are
correlations these are very very complex
experiences I mean my journey lasted
from 79 to 99 covering a 20-year spread
I didn't publish this book for another
20 years
and partly that was because of the legal
complications I had to retire from the
University before I did this but partly
it took me years during the sessions in
years after the sessions to to work out
the complex overlapping phenomenology of
these states of consciousness and you
know if I were I mean I think the word
guide is maybe not the best word I mean
that implies a role of active in
guidance of active direction which is
not really the case for I think working
with much of this work doing much of
this work but to be a sitter to be able
to hold the ground to be able to help
somebody go to the edge of everything
they know to be real and true about
themselves and about the world and help
them jump over the edge to give them the
support that they need to lose their
mind and to let go of everything they
know to be real and true I don't know
how one could really do that without
having first-hand experience of those
domains and so to that extent the I
think the effectiveness of therapists
our sitters will be limited to their own
depth of experience they can be very
very good and skillful at levels one two
perhaps but maybe not so much at levels
three four or five or whatever you get
the sense of it right yeah that's right
that's kind of interesting to think
about even like practical stuff like
going to different people for different
like sessions maybe I mean obviously you
have no idea what the hell is gonna come
up or
it but somebody focusing more on
personal dynamics right yeah and I think
it's good right now we're proceeding
very slowly very methodically we're
using gentler psychedelics is no federal
protocol that's suggesting using LSD in
the quantum and the high levels that I
used it and I think that's it that's
good that's important it's important
that we proceed methodological carefully
we have a window you know we lost our
window forty years ago yeah
the window is back and it's important
that we move very judiciously as we
expand that window but sooner or later
we're going to find what we found in the
early years of psychedelic work and that
is healing the personal unconscious is
only the first step of a long journey
into the universe into the deeper
dimensions of consciousness which take
us into the I don't know what do you
call it I think of it as the mind of the
universe the mind of the cosmos it's art
I hesitate to call it the divine mind or
the mind of God because that language
has very strong cultural overtones that
I don't really want to import but when
one dissolves when one completely
dissolves at the time-space level and
just dissolves into increasingly
comprehensive fields of experience that
open realities to you that you've never
even dreamed possible
and if you go back again and again in
the methodical way the levels of
consciousness and at first swallow you
up whole and it's very very hard to stay
consciously aware at these new levels
and that's why I think we often call
them ineffable but right if you go back
consistently over and over again what
happens is you acclimate you learn how
to stay conscious at levels of the
consciousness that previously we're not
able to stay conscious in and that's a
pattern that repeats itself as you go
deeper and deeper
[Music]
yeah I find that to be really true are
you familiar with this gentleman uh
Kalindi ie
from Detroit I'm not he is a very strong
proponent of these high-level doses and
I I struggle with his arguments around
it but but yours they you know seems
quite sensible it's you know how do we
approach it I'm not a proponent of high
doses myself I mean I did this work
I came through it see in the early years
the early high dose work done in Spring
Grove hospital and with terminally ill
patients well it's limited to three
sessions low dose psychedelic were
open-ended high dose work was limited to
three sessions and I thought going into
it I thought well if you could do it
safely three times you could do it
safely more time but what I found was
that by doing it as systematically as I
did and pushing that edge as hard as I
did it required that issues arose
challenges arose which had not been
discussed in the early levels of the
work opportunities for insights and
understanding emerge but also challenges
navigating these increasingly intense
levels and large levels of consciousness
and what it does to your body and mind
and as you go into these realities and
how it affects people around you mm-hmm
I found that my students never knew
about my work I mean I kept my work
completely isolated from anyone on
campus but I found at a certain point my
students began to be activated by my
psychedelic work there was a natural
contagion that was happening because
consciousness at these deeper levels is
open-ended it's like a lake you threw a
rock in the lake the ripples spread out
so when one person goes very very deep
people around them are naturally going
to be impacted and I had to learn how to
take care
the activations that my my students were
experiencing that's I wrote the book
living classroom as three that came out
of years and years of trying to
understand this dynamic between my mind
and their mind and our minds together in
the context of you know consciousness at
large so it's not just a matter of
taking care of your own body and your
own emotions and your intimate
relationships it's taking care of
everyone who's touched by you work at a
larger collective level I wouldn't push
it as hard if I were doing it again I
would it's not that I would avoid
working with high doses but I would
balance it working with lower doses and
I would balance working with LSD which
pushes a high cosmological ceiling with
psilocybin work in ayahuasca words
there's much more kind of embodied
psychedelic States yeah um man there's a
couple questions I want to ask the most
direction I want to go into but I want
to come back to the this idea the the
ripples rate cuz I've thought about this
a lot and I'm kind of curious what your
take is on this of having some of these
experiences and I've even had it in
breath work sessions where it's like
tapping into I guess how you like this
this lake you know you kind of toss it
in and there's like ripples and time
wave or something like that where all
these kind of synchronistic things might
start happening and I'm wondering from
your perspective you know you're talking
about your students changing do you
think that was more in the sense of your
presence and the way that you were
showing up or do you think it was kind
of more in that subtle realm world where
you're going into these states and it is
having more of a ripple on some other
sort of level I think it's in both and I
think it does as my work changed me
certainly my presence in the classroom
changed but the more interesting aspect
I think is working at the subtle level I
mean I began for example I found that
when I was lecturing and just just
looking for a random example looking for
an example
to illustrate some concept that I wanted
to make you know was bringing forward
and I would pause I would just stop and
my mind would go blank and I this idea
would come to me to give this example I
would use that example and students
began to come up to me after class and
began to say very quietly when they were
sure no one was listening you know it's
funny you use that example today because
that's exactly what happened to me this
week and this first I thought this was
just you know an interesting you know
accident but it kept happening and
happened repeatedly and not only was it
happening frequently enough that I knew
it was it had to have some significance
but the deeper I went in my own work the
more the students were being touched at
very very deep private personal areas of
their live lives places where they
needed healing places where they were
blocked places where they needed some
help getting through to the next stage
of their own development so as I was
kind of facing my blocks and entering
into deeper community with the
intelligence of life it was as if the
very fabric the intelligent fabric
around me was being activated and
triggering these kind of aha moments
with my students and and their own
confrontations with their blocks and the
students knew that something unusual was
happening I couldn't exactly explain
what it was but I had to you know we all
knew something was happening so I would
have students taking my courses partly
for the intellectual content but partly
because they wanted to be in the energy
of the room but I found it wasn't just
that there was a resonance spontaneously
occurring between my energy and their
energy there was a second phenomena that
I discussed in my living classroom and
that is the effect of group feels that
is that just like more for genetic feels
Rupert Sheldrake's concept of morphic
fields except these are smaller these
are not species wide fields these are
more specific fields I found that there
was there were psychic fields growing
around my
courses that we're getting stronger year
by year the more students studied with
me in these courses and it was a feel
that was being generated by their
learning so hundreds and hundreds of
students learning over many years
creates a field that was impacting and
accelerating and deepening the learning
of subsequent students and subsequent
semesters so it there were multiple
factors on going into this phenomenon
yeah it's super fascinating and I don't
know how to make sense of it at times so
yeah I think thanks for sharing that but
you know it turns out that once you let
go of an atomistic psychology once you
and it's not that atomistic psychology
is really true that is the psychology
which treats our individual
consciousness as the individual
standalone phenomena we know that that's
true but underneath that is a quantum
reality as a quantum psychology and once
you let go of this idea that everything
that happens around us can be explained
in terms of the of the aggregate of
simply individual awareness and open to
this larger participatory cosmos where
there is a deeper context and it's like
a deeper tide that's always moving in
and out it's always flowing it actually
becomes very coherent it's very easy to
understand it says that you have to
shift your metaphysical basis right yeah
that makes sense
what make sense it's like plate
tectonics you know in the early years it
was very very hard to see that just
looked ridiculous but once we began to
see it then a whole lot of data began to
make sense and it was elegant and
sensitive transparent mm-hmm I'm curious
also to kind of go back to that idea of
kind of incorporating mushrooms and
ayahuasca you kind of said that it seems
to be a little bit more body medicine
could you talk about the difference
between your experiences with LSD and
the more
plant-based psychedelics this is a
question that we we've been asked a lot
and I think we even chatted about in our
course last two nights ago of like you
know what is it or scream like LSD is is
that a little bit different that like I
vote like somebody said I always heard
it's like more psychological than say
you know more kind of like biographical
and doesn't have this like spirit right
where you albert hofmann right he said
you know psilocybin seems to be
something in there right so yeah I
wonder what your take is well inevitably
my take is based on my own personal
experiences so it's always dangerous to
generalize on an end of one so I just
don't want to over generalize
psychedelics which have been used
historically have feels associated with
them so we've been using mushrooms for
thousands and thousands of years and I
think there was a certain sense in which
around the biochemistry of this
substance they are fields of human
experience of human beings engaging the
deeper dimensions of their own
consciousness and consciousness at large
using this substance and when one takes
this substance you don't just introduce
a chemical into your body which then you
have a private experience of this
substance but there is a sense in which
how the substance affects you is
mediated in part by the history of your
species with this substance and I think
that's also true with ayahuasca with is
it you know multi thousand year history
surrounding ayahuasca with LSD we don't
have those fields I mean LSD is a new
substance and I don't think the
difference is fundamentally organic
versus synthetic and I don't find that
discussion terribly illuminating I mean
our experience in the 60s and 70s a few
decades that's not a whole lot of
experience when it comes to these types
of fields that I'm talking about so in
my experience that living quality that
kind of living intelligence quality
I'm sure that there are spiritual
agencies on the other side which may
account for part of that and part of it
I think has to do with humanity's living
experience with these substances and all
the experiences I've had with them
LSD strikes me as kind of cleaner in
that respect it doesn't have that same
kind of programmed quality now I don't
know what it would have been like if I
had been working with low doses of LSD
if I've been working with low doses I'm
sure it would have activated my
experiences would have been much more
personal and psycho dynamically oriented
but working with the very high doses
that I worked with after the first 15
sessions or so when the sessions were at
their peak hours I was not working in
relationship to my personals like at all
in fact pretty much in the book I I drop
out the personal story as much as
possible because the personal story kind
of showed up at the beginning of a
session and at the end of a session and
these were very meaningful experiences
to me they're very healing they're very
you know helpful by giving me insights
to relevant things in my life but during
the peak hours I was usually operating
far beyond the range of personal psyche
when I'm working with psilocybin I don't
have that experience of being so far
removed from my personal reality I don't
have I only have limited experience with
ayahuasca I like the medicine very much
is a very powerful medicine it's been
giving me some extraordinary help and
extraordinary clarity here and there but
I don't have enough experience with it
comparable to my 70-some high dose LSD
sessions to do a careful a be my basic
sense is that the sit assignment tends
to be less evocative less disruptive
less
opening up to the deep deep levels
ayahuasca is more disruptive opening up
to deeper levels still and at least for
me
LSD working with it as I did opens up to
very very deep cosmological levels
eventually I don't know of people I have
not seen though I haven't tried to do an
exhaustive search in the literature but
I have not seen people having
experiences with psilocybin and for the
most part even ayahuasca that correlate
to the experiences I was having in the
last 10 years of my work with LSD but
again that's just my personal experience
it's you know it's not a scholarly right
and what were some of your experiences
like towards the last ten years like I
guess yeah could you give us some
examples of like those big themes that
you're working through if it wasn't so
personal or psychodynamic well you know
that's a hard question because there's
so many levels and there's so many of
some it's it's always tricky to kind of
jump into the latter stages because
every stage builds upon earlier stages
but fray one of the one of the
barometers I would mention for example
would be time when I went into subtle
level reality I for a year I had a
consistent set of experiences where I
experienced the totality of my life from
beginning to end
a simultaneous ly present in in the
immediate now so I I not only had
insights into my old age and I didn't
experience my age in a lot of abstract
theoretical way I experienced the
distilled essence of my entire life
boiled down to right now and all of the
of my life was present at this
particular moment in time this was such
a mind shattering possibility that when
I first came back out of this experience
I couldn't remember it
it took me entering into it multiple
times to be able to really be able to
hold on to all of those experiences
which I write about in the chapter
called deep time in the soul going
beyond that I began to enter into
archetypal dimensions of archetypal
reality I began to have experiences of
something like the Platonic domain of
the reality behind time-space reality
except it wasn't archetypes like Plato
conceives of them
Plato conceives of archetypes as
unchanging ideas and the mind of a
transcendent intelligence my experience
these were vast huge beings that were so
huge I couldn't wrap my mind around them
and the best my mind could do in imaging
and was to sort of see them as galaxies
and I think was simply my mind's attempt
to image something that one would
measure in hundreds of thousands of
light years of scope but these were
beings that were responsible for
creating time and space and
orchestrating the unfolding of reality
in time and space I went into into what
I call deep time which is not eternity
isn't timelessness
but it's different magnitudes of time
experienced within a simultaneous or
broader frame of reference so I had many
experiences and became one of the
overarching themes of my book of
sessions and therefore the book of
humanity's future where humanity was
going what our moment in history was
what the archetypal trajectory of
humanity was what was happening behind
the scenes in this global sustainability
crisis that we're entering into what I
have a chapter in the book called
the birth of the future human lots and
lots of going into deep time by going
deep into humanity's future experiencing
what is attempting to be born in this
period of history what how evolution
works on this larger broader scale and
then eventually going deep into various
episodes of console oneness shouldn't
yata emptiness the experience of primal
void you know the void is behind
physical manifest existence
experience of cosmic law because of just
being overwhelmed with and I think love
is basically a kind of characteristic of
the inherent oneness of life we really
deep deep oneness that existence is and
you know the emotional counterpart of
that is loves compassion that the
emotion of oneness and then eventually
going beyond oneness beyond the boyd
into this diamond luminosity state which
once I touched the diamond luminosity
this occupied the last five years of my
work once I touched it it was a state of
I was a state of being a state of
consciousness so incredibly clear so
exquisitely clear that once I touched it
I wasn't interested in exploring any of
the other dimensions of consciousness
that I had been exploring for years
returning to that condition became my
sole objective mmm the next in the
twenty six twenty six sessions covering
four years of work I only touched that
condition four times and in between
those four sessions were tremendous
cleaning tremendous purification
tremendous detoxification so that I
could return to that condition and
experience it more clearly more
completely
so this there's a lot of levels
yeah that's what makes the story complex
story to tell yeah well people should
check out the book and
read through all this so yeah that's
nice now that the book is out you know
they don't have to get it for me
speaking you know I've done my best to
tell the story as cleanly and simply as
I can with without a lot of a
philosophical baggage that may have been
in some way earlier works right hmm is
there a story that you'd like to tell
the most about your project that that
maybe you could share here or any any
kind of specific gem you'd like to share
the mouse to you know it's a story of a
journey and every phase of the journey
was an exciting adventure in its own
right at the time when I was entering
into that territory and each one was
absolutely fascinating and captivating
to me when I was going through this
material and so I don't have a favorite
per se I mean I think of course the
diamond manasa T is from my own personal
heart that is the deepest dimensions of
the story the deepest aspect I think the
story of the birth of the future human
where reincarnation is taking humanity
is an important component of the story
because I what happened to me in one
particular session in the 38 session
without this cutting down to the
important piece here is that I began to
experience all my lives coming into me
all my former lives were kind of being
integrated and I I've done a lot of
other work hypnotic regression work to
familiarize myself with some of my deep
life history but I experienced all my
former lives coming in very quickly it
was like wrapping the stream on around a
tight spool hmm and they came a moment
when all about energy with all those
living experiences
as they fused and when they fuse they
ignited and there was a tremendous
explosion of diamond light from my chest
and it threw me into a completely
different state of consciousness and and
I think what I was being shown in this
experience what I was being given was an
understanding of where reincarnation is
taking us because classically
reincarnation
you know leads to a gradual hopefully a
you know sustained development of more
compassion more understanding developing
our qualities are deep essential nature
more and more richer and richer levels
we make mistakes we go back we we learn
we go forward in this process but I
don't think the process is really about
taking us incremental II to eventually
producing a better life which is
incremental II +1 from where we were
previously I think eventually if we die
and we expand in the after death
condition we're born and we contract
into a immediate one life focus we die
and we expand and we're born to go back
and forth and if we keep this up just
for hundreds and thousands and dents of
thousands and hundreds of thousands of
years if we keep this up sooner or later
the totality of our consciousness which
most people would experience only after
they die the deep soul sooner or later
that soul consciousness
I think the evolutionary trajectory is
for this consciousness to wake up inside
our physical incarnation and that's what
I call the birth of the diamond soul
when you wake up and we are not tempted
to identify with simply egoic this body
mind kind of structure that we know
ourselves to be an internal being we
know ourselves to be in relationship
with other eternal beings we have a felt
sense of history with many many of these
beings have been the compassion that
comes with that history and a sense of
open transparency to the cosmic
intelligence at large I think that's
basically where we're going and I don't
know I think
this is not a private experience it's a
collective experience the universe
doesn't work in in small numbers the
universe works with all species and
what's happening is really an evolving
of our entire species in them direction
if there were one thing I guess I keep I
would come back to one thing which I
wish I could tell it reach into my heart
and communicate to people it would be to
let go of this terribly constricting
fear of death because if we're afraid of
dying we've got it all backwards
you know heretofore the hard work is
done when we die we have all this
Hollywood [__] about what happens to
us when we die and most of it most of
its just trash when we die we enter you
know we go back home we enter the vast
majority of us entered pretty very
easily straight into the depth of where
we come from and there are many layers
of that reality so there's a lot of work
to do but there's absolutely nothing to
fear and death and one of the things
that's come out of my work is I just I
don't have a fear of death I mean dying
it's pain ass but being it has
absolutely no fear for me in fact it's
something I look forward to very much
Kyle how do you respond to that
that resonates a lot with me of what
you're saying like kind of gave me a
little bit of chills so I don't know if
you know my my story listeners probably
know this if you've been following us
for a while but when I was 16 I had a
near-death experience and so rupture my
spleen when I was in the MRI or the cat
scan machine I was overwhelmed with this
this blissful feeling of love and beauty
that I was going back home and there is
a sense something came over me and said
you're going back home you're going to
you're going back to the stars where we
all come from and this you know physical
life's gonna cease to exist but you're
gonna continue on and
that was really beautiful and it wasn't
scary when I when I first heard I was
dying and it's like they said you know
you have internal injuries
you're losing massive blood I thought it
you know I was pretty terrified but in
that moment as I was drifting away total
acceptance and so I actually had a
really hard time coming back here right
because and I could probably resonate
with that idea the diamond loose
luminosity of wanting to return there
because I definitely resonate with that
feeling of wanting to return to that
oneness that I felt on that night and
that's what got me into like exploring
psychedelics is having very similar
experiences with psychedelics and
correlating that to my near-death
experience and wanting to get back there
and over time and maybe you'll resonate
with this is like the period in between
of stopping and actually focusing on the
integration and I keep coming back to
this idea that the work is here this is
where all the magic happens and how do
we really have audio that and show up
yeah yeah to to complain about the
restrictions of time and space is kind
of like a weightlifter complaining about
the weights this is where the work is
time-space is an extremely demanding
environment but progress made here has
exponential import for what we're what's
available to us when we die of all the
various populations the people I feel
the closest affinity from my own
psychedelic work or the near-death
episode people I've taught near-death
episode research for years at my
university in one of my courses and so
I've really read deeply in the
near-death literature and that's the
closest correlation I find with the
deepest of the psychedelic experiences
very strong correlations and can ring
was one of the near death sewed you know
one of the founders of that movement and
I have we've written together and
dialogue together he's a good friend
around that hmm yeah yeah that's it's
it's a powerful topic something I think
about often and I guess my early
experiences got me really on this path
was just like no I enter this space
where just felt so similar with like
this I had an experience with psilocybin
where just so on par with dying and just
captivated my attention of how could a
substance like this I mean I guess in a
sense you know if you take it from the
sick of therapeutic like lens it's like
reliving trauma right I'm kind of my
psyche is processing that experience and
I'm going back there to kind of
reprocess it but you have plenty of
other experiences where no it still felt
pretty similar and on par with that
original near-death experience yeah I've
died many times I mean I feel like the
early work at Spring Grove was to give
people a foretaste of where they're
going going and they died and you know
I've gone through that and shamans this
is very familiar territory so there's
nothing unique to me there but I've gone
through that death process so many times
it's it feels very comfortable and very
natural and coming back is sometimes
challenging I mean the hardest chapter
for me to write in this book was the
last chapter coming on the mountain it
basically tells the story of what half
and after I stopped my sessions and I
basically entered into a period
eventually a deep deep existential
loneliness I found that I had really
worked very hard in integrating my
sessions I did all in all my very
carefully I wrote them down I studied
them I tried to incorporate their
teaching into my life I really thought I
had you know locked down pretty well and
I thought therefore that I could stop my
sessions and I would just be able to
kind of collect and ponder the many
gifts that I had been given through the
years but what I learned was that
integrating an entire journey is
different than integrating individual
sessions and that by repeatedly going
deeper and deeper and deeper into the
universe and experienced the exquisite
ecstasy of dissolving into sheer light
repeatedly and entering into dissolving
into the crystalline body of the divine
when for various reasons I made the
decision that it was time for this work
to stop I found that I had a I was
suffering from a loss of communion mmm a
deep deep existential sadness and
eventually years down the road I found
that I was really just waiting to die
mmm that I could return to the light and
I realized you know that wasn't right
that's not the way this work is supposed
to end you know my entire body was
screaming failure to integrate yeah but
because I had been so careful trying to
integrate it wasn't clear what the where
the imbalance had come in what I found
eventually is that there was an
imbalance that had I had cultivated
inadvertently between transcendence and
imminence it's all the divine the
physical universe is the divine I knew
that it was the divine I knew that we're
never absent from the divine for any
moment it's only our own illusions to
keep us in that sense but I had pushed
so deeply into transcendence that in
this to a certain degree I had lost my
foot
in the eminent divine and I had to make
a conscious choice and and undertake
specific practices to really kind of
ground myself back in the eminent divine
for the remainder of my years on this
earth it took about ten years mm-hmm for
me to really
solidly comfortably back inside my time
space suit Wow I could imagine after 20
years of deep exploration I mean that's
a I'd say that's probably a pretty long
integration process yeah yeah and that's
I think you know this respect my story
is sometimes described as a hero's
journey but it's not the hero's journey
the way it's usually thought of it's not
exactly going and experiencing something
and bringing back you know something
valuable for your culture for yourself
you know it's all it's tempered by its
tempered by a kind of lesson that comes
from dealing with not the failure of
some aspect of the journey but actually
of the success of the journey but being
wounded by the sheer beauty of what one
experiences you literally are wounded by
the beauty of the universe by the
experiencing the extraordinary
intelligence of the universe
extraordinary love of the universe and
if you're not able to create a container
inside your historical existence where
you can breathe this intelligence in and
breathe the compassion in then you know
it's like it literally can kind of
become painful mm-hmm so my story is in
part of a it's a cautionary tale it
cautions against and even though I tried
to be as methodical as possible to do it
as carefully as possible and integrated
as deeply as I could
it cautions against going too deep too
fat
asked if you can call 20 years too fast
going to deeper deeper than you can
actually productively use and I think my
memories have changed not only the rest
of the years of my life but my memories
have changed the trajectory of my aunt
Souls entire evolution so I don't think
of the results of my journey as
necessarily coming to fruition in just
you know the next few decades I think
they come to fruition over lifetimes
it's changed the entire trajectory of my
deep evolutionary project and I think
that's true for anyone who enters into
this you know when you enter into deep
intimacy with life in this way
you purifying your purifying you offload
a lot of you know painful trauma
whatever whatever but you also open up
to it a different different relationship
with the universe so right now my
primary way of being with the universe
in this intimate way is not working with
psychedelics at time of my life is
largely over I'm 70 years old and this
is you know somewhat of a young man's
game a young person's game but I do a
lot of condenser of classical
contemporary
a lot of Audrianna practice which I find
to be very complementary to deep
psychedelic work I don't feel any
cross-purposes between the two different
work methods of working I should mention
in this context though I think would be
a mistake to hold to sort of evaluate
the value of psychedelic deep
psychedelic work by holding it
accountable just to the Enlightenment
project I started this work with an
agenda of an Enlightenment project what
happened
my personal awakening was completely
eclipsed eventually by a project of a
collective awakening all my work began
to be focused on a type of healing of
the collective psyche that went beyond
my personal healing and an awakening of
my personal awakening and then it became
just a radical adventure a cosmological
adventure going so deep that it would be
impossible to bring those experiences
back and stabilize them in a some kind
of spiritually awakened state it's just
a different project you know the
Enlightenment project and cosmological
exploration project these are two
different projects that have to be
evaluated on their own terms my two
cents now yeah degree yeah yes this is
quite the interview this certainly like
much I knew it was gonna be a big topic
but I'm always impressed by how big some
of these things become you know hey I do
think some people are doing similar
projects nowadays though I want I wonder
if LSD is still in vogue in this context
you know I don't know I worked with LSD
primarily because that was the work that
Stan had done most of his early work
with and I trusted what I saw in Stan's
research and I trusted you know the
history there in the methodology he
developed I only began to work with
other psychedelic substances pretty much
after my LSD work was done and so the
mind that I brought to my psilocybin
experiences and my ayahuasca experiences
and salvia divinorum so on and so forth
the mind was that the mind that had been
trance
formed by all my previous psychedelic
work which is the other thing too you
know important to take account of that
the mind the experiences that we have
reflect the entire history of our
working in non-ordinary states of
consciousness so if we've done this work
for only a few two or three times well
then we have that kind of depth of
experience to bring to it but if we've
been doing this work for years and years
and years and actually these substances
are going to have a different kind of
effect because we've been transformed
the way I think of this is that listen
my experience the universe is an
infinite ocean of possibilities just an
infinite ocean that will never ever get
to the end of it I is to think and we'll
get to an end state that was the project
to get to to get to the end condition
that was taken away from me along the
journey I began to understand it
infinite infinite progression I'm
getting distracted from my original
point by that particular particular
image yeah I'll just stick with that I
lost my train of thought but on yeah
that works for us because it's our
orientation is this grothy and meets
Whitehead and John Cobb kind of
synthesis and you know largely this at
least the project of the company here
but yeah yeah it's it's good to hear
that you know in it it rhymes in a sense
with that Bodhisattva vow of let's keep
going like there's not this endpoint
Nirvana until everybody's there and it's
gonna be a long time even enters into
that discussion it's a long time except
of course it's speeding up no it's kind
of like our collective karma as a
species is coming out it's hard you know
the whole history you know our culture
is basically a culture that's been built
by ego and for all the many virtues and
values of the ego it's basically it's
fundamentally a fragmented condition and
therefore it creates a world which is
deeply imbalance with between ourselves
and between other life forms and you
know that world is coming to a radical
and accelerated breakdown and and I
think this is I took part of the
evolutionary pivot that we are coming
into a time where we literally will not
be able to continue operating out of the
same not just an economic or industrial
or technological basis but we will not
be able to continue functioning out of
the same psychological basis of the core
consciousness so how fast we might make
this transition if we use historical
projections from the past would probably
deeply underestimate how fast this could
happen in fact in that chapter on the
birth of the future human where I talk
about particularly one special session
fifty five it could be deep into the
death and rebirth of humanity the
message that kept coming through over
and over and over again was this is
going to happen much faster than anyone
could imagine it's gonna happen much
faster mmm you know so I think we're the
game is getting very very intense we're
being driven into nonlinear dynamics
deals that when your consciousness yeah
collective psyche is being hyper
stimulated by the trauma that were going
into and when systems we know from
physical systems from physical systems
enter into nonlinear conditions they can
do things that they could not do when
they were in lower energy linear
conditions and I think that something
similar happens with psychic fields the
integrated psychic field that holds all
of our individual Minds when that
psychic field is hyper stimulated by the
suffering that we're going into
but it's hyperstimulated moves will
eventually move into a nonlinear
condition and the rules of nonlinear
conditions of dynamics apply to psychic
fields as well as physical fields small
changes can elicit huge outcomes latent
connectivity which was kind of invisible
at the linear level becomes suddenly
active and visible at the nonlinear
level things can happen much faster at
the nonlinear level but at the linear
level so you know we're going into a
trial by fire and I think this trial is
actually part of the conscious intention
of the creative intelligence itself I
don't think it's accidental and I don't
think there are any victims here you
know personally my own personal belief
is we all chose to be here we chose to
be part of this time in history yeah
it's an extraordinarily important time
to be fully conscious and fully active
it's give me chills thinking about that
and it's interesting it does feel like
things are really kind of speeding up
and you know sometimes I'm like oh you
know you always kind of hear that as you
get older time seems to be speeding out
but even you know
talk to people that are older and things
just seem to be happening quicker and
quicker it is really interesting they
like I can't like hold on to anything
you know it's like once you kind of
grass onto it something else has already
changed form you know it's yeah yeah so
many of our not only our technology is
driving this way but our social customs
you know just they're dissolving right
out from underneath us the standards of
truth are changing and it's a confusing
time and it's a it's a dangerous time
and it's a hard time well it's an
extraordinarily exciting time it is do
you see psychedelics aiding in this in
any way yeah absolutely
I think that the ways in which
psychedelics have come back into our
culture both from the Central American
and South American cultures which have
kept this tradition alive the the new
psychedelics these you know LSD is often
compared to the atom bomb the rains they
were discovered at the same time this
exponential this opportunity to explore
dimensions of consciousness that
previously previous generation is for
the most part and classically I had to
spend lifetimes meditating in order just
to get access to some of them and now
people are even modest spiritual
capacities can have temporary
experiences of these realities which
have a profound they require a profound
redrafting of our existential
assumptions about how life works and
that we can do this we can engage these
these dimensions of consciousness not
for recreational purposes so not even
for healing purposes but we can engage
them systematically for educational and
deep transformational purposes not only
for our own personal transformation but
we can we can work on behalf of the
collective many states of consciousness
I mean I think psychedelics have just
they have that's that's what I saw when
I first read stay in Grossberg I thought
this is going to change everything it's
going to be a true before and after
development we're gonna it's like the
mention of the SE scented microscope for
biology and the telescope for astronomy
it just increases the quantity of doubt
and we have access to so to so that it
changes it forces a radical revision of
our theoretical understanding I think
it's like you know it's a part of it and
just in time because we have very little
time yeah feels that way yeah it's
coming out it's very fast very fast be
cool so I'd hate to end the podcast but
we're at over an hour and I don't I want
to be respectful of your time and I
really appreciate this this is a very
enlightening episode can you tell us a
little bit about where people can find
your book and perhaps the upcoming audio
book oh they can find the book on Amazon
I'm just putting the final edits on the
audio book I'm not sure that will be
released through inner traditions I'm
not quite sure what the vehicle will be
for that but it should be out hopefully
by the beginning the beginning of the
year I will have a website up hopefully
by the first of the year I'm Way overdue
in revising this website and getting it
posted but eventually within a month or
so people will be able to find me at
Chris pace calm that's going to be the
easiest way right now
most of my written work and some tapes
are collected at academia.edu under my
name you can find them listed there but
right now I'm not as good on social
media as I should be it's hard to keep
up with yeah only do one it's not
working everywhere yeah the most what's
really exciting is the book is finally
out and it's as clear a presentation of
this material as I've been able to take
me five years to put it together and
bring it
forward and it says it's as good as I
can tell the story well thank you for
all your work and really appreciate you
joining us on the show today
thank you guys it's been a real honor I
really appreciate the work you're doing
keep it up and you keep getting the word
out you know you guys are social
catalyst do we need all those social
catalyst and we can get these days thank
you yeah well we'll keep plugging along
[Music]